docs/visual-development.md, before:

---
layout: default
title: Visual Development Guide
---

# [Home](/) › Visual Development

# Visual Development Guide

This guide documents the visual assets for the Engram platform and provides JSON prompts for generating consistent imagery using AI image generation tools like Nano Banana Pro.

## Platform Visuals

### 1. Platform Architecture Diagram

![Engram Platform Architecture](/assets/images/engram-platform-architecture.png)

**Description**: A comprehensive visual representation of the Engram platform showing the Brain + Spine architecture, data flows, and component interactions.

#### JSON Prompt

```json
{
  "diagram_type": "technical_architecture",
  "title": "Engram Context Engineering Platform",
  "style": {
    "aesthetic": "modern_tech_dark_theme",
    "color_scheme": {
      "background": "#0a0e1a",
      "primary": "#00d4ff",
      "secondary": "#a855f7",
      "accent": "#10b981",
      "text": "#e2e8f0"
    },
    "visual_style": "glassmorphism_with_glow"
  },
  "components": [
    {
      "name": "Frontend",
      "type": "layer",
      "position": "top",
      "elements": ["React UI", "Voice Controls", "Avatar Display"],
      "color": "#3b82f6"
    },
    {
      "name": "API Gateway",
      "type": "middleware",
      "position": "upper-middle",
      "elements": ["FastAPI", "Auth Middleware", "RBAC"],
      "color": "#10b981"
    },
    {
      "name": "Brain Layer",
      "type": "core_component",
      "position": "middle-left",
      "elements": ["LangGraph Agents", "Elena", "Marcus", "Router"],
      "color": "#00d4ff",
      "glow": true
    },
    {
      "name": "Spine Layer",
      "type": "core_component",
      "position": "middle-center",
      "elements": ["Temporal Workflows", "Activities", "Signals"],
      "color": "#a855f7",
      "glow": true
    },
    {
      "name": "Memory Layer",
      "type": "core_component",
      "position": "middle-right",
      "elements": ["Zep", "Graphiti", "Vector Store"],
      "color": "#f59e0b",
      "glow": true
    },
    {
      "name": "Infrastructure",
      "type": "layer",
      "position": "bottom",
      "elements": ["Azure Container Apps", "PostgreSQL", "Key Vault"],
      "color": "#6b7280"
    }
  ],
  ### 2. Voice Interaction Flow (removed)

  Voice diagrams are omitted because voice features are disabled in this build.

      "icon": "avatar_speaking",
      "description": "Lip-sync animation",
      "color": "#f59e0b"
    }
  ],
  "data_labels": [
    {"between": [0, 1], "label": "Audio WAV"},
    {"between": [1, 2], "label": "Transcript"},
    {"between": [2, 3], "label": "Response Text"},
    {"between": [3, 4], "label": "Audio + Visemes"}
  ]
}
```

---

### 3. Agent Workflow Diagram

![Agent Workflow Diagram](/assets/images/agent-workflow-diagram.png)

**Description**: Illustrates how Elena and Marcus collaborate with handoff patterns.

#### JSON Prompt

```json
{
  "diagram_type": "collaboration_flow",
  "title": "Agent Collaboration Workflow",
  "style": {
    "aesthetic": "modern_tech_dark_theme",
    "layout": "circular_with_center"
  },
  "agents": [
    {
      "name": "Elena",
      "role": "Business Analyst",
      "position": "left",
      "color": "#00d4ff",
      "avatar": "elena_portrait"
    },
    {
      "name": "Marcus",
      "role": "Project Manager",
      "position": "right",
      "color": "#a855f7",
      "avatar": "marcus_portrait"
    }
  ],
  "center_element": {
    "name": "Agent Router",
    "description": "Context-aware routing",
    "icon": "router_switch"
  },
  "workflows": [
    {
      "trigger": "Requirements question",
      "from": "User",
      "to": "Elena",
      "arrow_style": "solid"
    },
    {
      "trigger": "Planning question",
      "from": "User",
      "to": "Marcus",
      "arrow_style": "solid"
    },
    {
      "trigger": "Handoff: plan this",
      "from": "Elena",
      "to": "Marcus",
      "arrow_style": "dashed",
      "label": "Context Transfer"
    },
    {
      "trigger": "Handoff: analyze requirements",
      "from": "Marcus",
      "to": "Elena",
      "arrow_style": "dashed",
      "label": "Context Transfer"
    }
  ]
}
```

---

### 4. Context Schema Visualization

![4-Layer Context Schema](/assets/images/context-schema.png)

**Description**: Visual representation of the 4-layer EnterpriseContext schema.

#### JSON Prompt

```json
{
  "diagram_type": "layered_schema",
  "title": "4-Layer Enterprise Context Schema",
  "style": {
    "aesthetic": "modern_tech_dark_theme",
    "layout": "stacked_layers_3d"
  },
  "layers": [
    {
      "number": 1,
      "name": "Security Context",
      "color": "#ef4444",
      "fields": ["user_id", "tenant_id", "roles", "scopes", "session_id"],
      "description": "WHO is asking"
    },
    {
      "number": 2,
      "name": "Episodic State",
      "color": "#f59e0b",
      "fields": ["conversation_id", "recent_turns", "summary"],
      "description": "WHAT happened recently"
    },
    {
      "number": 3,
      "name": "Semantic Knowledge",
      "color": "#10b981",
      "fields": ["retrieved_facts", "entity_context", "graph_nodes"],
      "description": "WHAT we know"
    },
    {
      "number": 4,
      "name": "Operational State",
      "color": "#3b82f6",
      "fields": ["current_plan", "active_tools", "workflow_id", "status"],
      "description": "WHAT we're doing"
    }
  ],
  "flow_arrow": {
    "direction": "top_to_bottom",
    "label": "Context flows through all layers"
  }
}
```

---

### 5. Engram Logo

![Engram Logo](/assets/images/engram-logo.png)

**Description**: The Engram platform logo representing memory and neural connections.

#### JSON Prompt

```json
{
  "logo_type": "abstract_tech",
  "name": "Engram",
  "concept": "memory_trace_neural_pathway",
  "style": {
    "aesthetic": "minimalist_futuristic",
    "color_palette": {
      "primary": "#00d4ff",
      "secondary": "#a855f7",
      "glow": true
    }
  },
  "elements": {
    "primary_shape": "stylized_brain_outline",
    "accent": "neural_pathway_traces",
    "integration": "memory_node_constellation"
  },
  "variations": [
    {"type": "full_color", "background": "dark"},
    {"type": "monochrome", "background": "light"},
    {"type": "icon_only", "size": "favicon"}
  ]
}
```

---

## Image Asset Locations

| Asset | Path | Resolution | Format |
|-------|------|------------|--------|
| Platform Architecture | `/assets/images/engram-platform-architecture.png` | 1920x1080 | PNG |
| Voice Interaction Flow | `/assets/images/voice-interaction-flow.png` | 1920x600 | PNG |
| Agent Workflow | `/assets/images/agent-workflow-diagram.png` | 1200x800 | PNG |
| Context Schema | `/assets/images/context-schema.png` | 1200x900 | PNG |
| Elena Portrait | `/assets/images/elena-portrait.png` | 512x512 | PNG |
| Marcus Portrait | `/assets/images/marcus-portrait.png` | 512x512 | PNG |
| Engram Logo | `/assets/images/engram-logo.png` | 800x200 | PNG |
| Logo Icon | `/assets/images/engram-icon.png` | 512x512 | PNG |

---

## Generating New Visuals

To generate consistent visuals for the Engram platform:

1. **Use the JSON prompts** above as templates
2. **Maintain the color scheme**:
   - Background: `#0a0e1a`
   - Primary (Cyan): `#00d4ff`
   - Secondary (Purple): `#a855f7`
   - Accent (Green): `#10b981`
   - Text: `#e2e8f0`
3. **Apply glassmorphism** effects with subtle glows
4. **Export at appropriate resolutions** for web use

### Tips for Nano Banana Pro

- Use `"render_style": "photorealistic_with_slight_stylization"` for portraits
- Use `"aesthetic": "modern_tech_dark_theme"` for diagrams
- Include `"glow": true` for interactive elements
- Specify exact hex colors for brand consistency

Commit message:

feat: Complete enterprise BAU implementation with full test coverage
- Add design-to-implementation contract in docs
- Create backend routers: BAU, Metrics, Validation
- Wire all frontend services to real APIs
- Replace mocks with API client calls
- Wire UI components: BAUHub, EvidenceTelemetry, WorkflowDetail, GoldenThreadRunner
- Add MSW for frontend testing
- Create comprehensive test suites (Vitest, pytest, Playwright E2E)
- Add CI/CD workflow with frontend, backend, and E2E test jobs

This completes the POC-to-enterprise transition with all screens built,
wired, tested, and validated as per the design contract.

docs/visual-development.md, after:

---
layout: default
title: Visual Development Guide
---

# [Home](/) › Visual Development

# Visual Development Guide

This guide documents the visual assets for the Engram platform and provides JSON prompts for generating consistent imagery using AI image generation tools like Nano Banana Pro.

## Platform Visuals

### 1. Platform Architecture Diagram

![Engram Platform Architecture](/assets/images/engram-platform-architecture.png)

**Description**: A comprehensive visual representation of the Engram platform showing the Brain + Spine architecture, data flows, and component interactions.

#### JSON Prompt

```json
{
  "diagram_type": "technical_architecture",
  "title": "Engram Context Engineering Platform",
  "style": {
    "aesthetic": "modern_tech_dark_theme",
    "color_scheme": {
      "background": "#0a0e1a",
      "primary": "#00d4ff",
      "secondary": "#a855f7",
      "accent": "#10b981",
      "text": "#e2e8f0"
    },
    "visual_style": "glassmorphism_with_glow"
  },
  "components": [
    {
      "name": "Frontend",
      "type": "layer",
      "position": "top",
      "elements": ["React UI", "Voice Controls", "Avatar Display"],
      "color": "#3b82f6"
    },
    {
      "name": "API Gateway",
      "type": "middleware",
      "position": "upper-middle",
      "elements": ["FastAPI", "Auth Middleware", "RBAC"],
      "color": "#10b981"
    },
    {
      "name": "Brain Layer",
      "type": "core_component",
      "position": "middle-left",
      "elements": ["LangGraph Agents", "Elena", "Marcus", "Router"],
      "color": "#00d4ff",
      "glow": true
    },
    {
      "name": "Spine Layer",
      "type": "core_component",
      "position": "middle-center",
      "elements": ["Temporal Workflows", "Activities", "Signals"],
      "color": "#a855f7",
      "glow": true
    },
    {
      "name": "Memory Layer",
      "type": "core_component",
      "position": "middle-right",
      "elements": ["Zep", "Graphiti", "Vector Store"],
      "color": "#f59e0b",
      "glow": true
    },
    {
      "name": "Infrastructure",
      "type": "layer",
      "position": "bottom",
      "elements": ["Azure Container Apps", "PostgreSQL", "Key Vault"],
      "color": "#6b7280"
    }
  ],
  ### 2. Voice Interaction Flow (removed)

  Voice diagrams are omitted because voice features are disabled in this build.

      "icon": "avatar_speaking",
      "description": "Lip-sync animation",
      "color": "#f59e0b"
    }
  ],
  "data_labels": [
    {"between": [0, 1], "label": "Audio WAV"},
    {"between": [1, 2], "label": "Transcript"},
    {"between": [2, 3], "label": "Response Text"},
    {"between": [3, 4], "label": "Audio + Visemes"}
  ]
}
```

---

### 3. Agent Workflow Diagram

![Agent Workflow Diagram](/assets/images/agent-workflow-diagram.png)

**Description**: Illustrates how Elena and Marcus collaborate with handoff patterns.

#### JSON Prompt

```json
{
  "diagram_type": "collaboration_flow",
  "title": "Agent Collaboration Workflow",
  "style": {
    "aesthetic": "modern_tech_dark_theme",
    "layout": "circular_with_center"
  },
  "agents": [
    {
      "name": "Elena",
      "role": "Business Analyst",
      "position": "left",
      "color": "#00d4ff",
      "avatar": "elena_portrait"
    },
    {
      "name": "Marcus",
      "role": "Project Manager",
      "position": "right",
      "color": "#a855f7",
      "avatar": "marcus_portrait"
    }
  ],
  "center_element": {
    "name": "Agent Router",
    "description": "Context-aware routing",
    "icon": "router_switch"
  },
  "workflows": [
    {
      "trigger": "Requirements question",
      "from": "User",
      "to": "Elena",
      "arrow_style": "solid"
    },
    {
      "trigger": "Planning question",
      "from": "User",
      "to": "Marcus",
      "arrow_style": "solid"
    },
    {
      "trigger": "Handoff: plan this",
      "from": "Elena",
      "to": "Marcus",
      "arrow_style": "dashed",
      "label": "Context Transfer"
    },
    {
      "trigger": "Handoff: analyze requirements",
      "from": "Marcus",
      "to": "Elena",
      "arrow_style": "dashed",
      "label": "Context Transfer"
    }
  ]
}
```

---

### 4. Context Schema Visualization

![4-Layer Context Schema](/assets/images/context-schema.png)

**Description**: Visual representation of the 4-layer EnterpriseContext schema.

#### JSON Prompt

```json
{
  "diagram_type": "layered_schema",
  "title": "4-Layer Enterprise Context Schema",
  "style": {
    "aesthetic": "modern_tech_dark_theme",
    "layout": "stacked_layers_3d"
  },
  "layers": [
    {
      "number": 1,
      "name": "Security Context",
      "color": "#ef4444",
      "fields": ["user_id", "tenant_id", "roles", "scopes", "session_id"],
      "description": "WHO is asking"
    },
    {
      "number": 2,
      "name": "Episodic State",
      "color": "#f59e0b",
      "fields": ["conversation_id", "recent_turns", "summary"],
      "description": "WHAT happened recently"
    },
    {
      "number": 3,
      "name": "Semantic Knowledge",
      "color": "#10b981",
      "fields": ["retrieved_facts", "entity_context", "graph_nodes"],
      "description": "WHAT we know"
    },
    {
      "number": 4,
      "name": "Operational State",
      "color": "#3b82f6",
      "fields": ["current_plan", "active_tools", "workflow_id", "status"],
      "description": "WHAT we're doing"
    }
  ],
  "flow_arrow": {
    "direction": "top_to_bottom",
    "label": "Context flows through all layers"
  }
}
```

---

### 5. Engram Logo

![Engram Logo](/assets/images/engram-logo.png)

**Description**: The Engram platform logo representing memory and neural connections.

#### JSON Prompt

```json
{
  "logo_type": "abstract_tech",
  "name": "Engram",
  "concept": "memory_trace_neural_pathway",
  "style": {
    "aesthetic": "minimalist_futuristic",
    "color_palette": {
      "primary": "#00d4ff",
      "secondary": "#a855f7",
      "glow": true
    }
  },
  "elements": {
    "primary_shape": "stylized_brain_outline",
    "accent": "neural_pathway_traces",
    "integration": "memory_node_constellation"
  },
  "variations": [
    {"type": "full_color", "background": "dark"},
    {"type": "monochrome", "background": "light"},
    {"type": "icon_only", "size": "favicon"}
  ]
}
```

---

## Image Asset Locations

| Asset | Path | Resolution | Format |
|-------|------|------------|--------|
| Platform Architecture | `/assets/images/engram-platform-architecture.png` | 1920x1080 | PNG |
| Voice Interaction Flow | `/assets/images/voice-interaction-flow.png` | 1920x600 | PNG |
| Agent Workflow | `/assets/images/agent-workflow-diagram.png` | 1200x800 | PNG |
| Context Schema | `/assets/images/context-schema.png` | 1200x900 | PNG |
| Elena Portrait | `/assets/images/elena-portrait.png` | 512x512 | PNG |
| Marcus Portrait | `/assets/images/marcus-portrait.png` | 512x512 | PNG |
| Engram Logo | `/assets/images/engram-logo.png` | 800x200 | PNG |
| Logo Icon | `/assets/images/engram-icon.png` | 512x512 | PNG |

---

## Generating New Visuals

To generate consistent visuals for the Engram platform:

1. **Use the JSON prompts** above as templates
2. **Maintain the color scheme**:
   - Background: `#0a0e1a`
   - Primary (Cyan): `#00d4ff`
   - Secondary (Purple): `#a855f7`
   - Accent (Green): `#10b981`
   - Text: `#e2e8f0`
3. **Apply glassmorphism** effects with subtle glows
4. **Export at appropriate resolutions** for web use

### Tips for Nano Banana Pro

- Use `"render_style": "photorealistic_with_slight_stylization"` for portraits
- Use `"aesthetic": "modern_tech_dark_theme"` for diagrams
- Include `"glow": true"` for interactive elements
- Specify exact hex colors for brand consistency

---

## Design-to-Implementation Contract

Every screen and flow depicted in `/assets/images/` represents required functionality. The visual design drives all functionality that should be built and fully tested. This is the critical part of the ability required to go from POC to enterprise adoption as BAU.

| Image | Screen/Feature | API Endpoints | Test Suite |
|-------|---------------|---------------|------------|
| bau-hub.png | BAU Hub | `/api/v1/bau/*` | `BAUHub.test.tsx`, `test_bau_router.py` |
| evidence-telemetry-panel.png | Evidence & Telemetry | `/api/v1/metrics/evidence` | `EvidenceTelemetry.test.tsx`, `test_metrics_router.py` |
| golden-thread-validation.png | Golden Thread Runner | `/api/v1/validation/*` | `GoldenThreadRunner.test.tsx`, `test_validation_router.py` |
| workflow-detail-durable-spine.png | Workflow Detail | `/api/v1/workflows/:id` | `WorkflowDetail.test.tsx` |
| memory-search-provenance.png | Memory Search | `/api/v1/memory/search` | `Search.test.tsx` |

**Contract Requirements:**
- All screens must be built with all intended flows, connections, and functions inherent to the visual design
- The design drives all functionality that should be built
- All functionality must be fully tested and validated to be completely working
- This contract is the acceptance criteria for POC-to-enterprise transition
